LAB 1

	Download Lab 1 from the course website

		It must be submitted before end of day of 9/8 to the LMS assignments area for Lab 1

			-Name the file "Lab1-YourFullName.docx" (if you do not have Word, you can use a text editor to answer the questions; save as a text file).
			-Do not use Google docs/sheets


	1.Basic Network Information
		a.ipconfig
			What is your hostname? 
				bobma
			What is your MAC address?  
				WIFI:     e0:f8:47:29:9b:d4
				Ethernet: c8:2a:14:07:8e:39
			Who is the vendor of your Ethernet adapter?
				Apple
			What is your IPv4 address? 
				129.161.48.165
			What is your IPv6 address?
				2620::2820:d04:e2f8:47ff:fe29:9bd4
				2620::2820:d04:c4f:a5ef:16b1:8d8c temporary
			What are the IP (v4) addresses of your DNS servers?
				128.113.28.67
				128.113.26.77				
			What is the IP (v4) address of your default gateway?  
				129.161.49.254

		b.netstat -4 –f (netstat –f inet)
			What kind of transport layer protocols are in use?
				TCP 4
				UDP 4
				UDP 46
			What kind of application layer protocols are in use? 
				https
				http

		c.netstat -4 –b (netstat –b –f inetp)
			What applications are using your network ports, and what application layer protocol are they using? (only name up to three) 
				Safari	Https
				Chrome	https

		d.nslookup 192.0.32.10 
		nslookup it allows you to look up IPs or hostnames against a name server (by default, the first DNS server configured in your network settings).
			1.Upon running “nslookup 192.0.32.10”, what is the host name of the name server you are using?
				192.in-addr.arpa	nameserver = y.arin.net.
				192.in-addr.arpa	nameserver = r.arin.net.
				192.in-addr.arpa	nameserver = arin.authdns.ripe.net.
				192.in-addr.arpa	nameserver = x.arin.net.
				192.in-addr.arpa	nameserver = z.arin.net.
				192.in-addr.arpa	nameserver = u.arin.net.
			2.What name is associated with 192.0.32.10?  What is the significance of this name?
				10.32.0.192.in-addr.arpa	name = ccnso.icann.org
				It's the domain name of its owner.  
			3.Perform a “netstat –n” in your console (this tells netstat not to resolve names against the name server – notice that it’s quicker).  Do an nslookup on a foreign IP from your netstat results.  What name did you uncover?  (If the DNS server can’t resolve the IP you picked, try another one.)
				roundcube.rpi.edu for 128.113.2.23

			4.Do an “nslookup 127.0.0.1”.  What name is returned?  What is the significance of this name?
				localhost
				It's the address of my laptop for a inter-net.
			5.What is the IP address of rpilms.rpi.edu?
				128.113.26.134
			6.What is the IP address of www.rpi.edu? Is it IPv4 or IPv6?  
				128.113.0.2
				IPv4

		e.tracert -4 www.ucla.edu (traceroute www.ucla.edu)
			1.How many hops did it take for you to reach www.ucla.edu?
				13 hops
			2.From the tracert you just ran, locate an IPv4 address of a router along the path.  Visit http://www.iplocation.net/ and enter the IPv4 address.  Were you able to determine the router’s location?  If so, where is it?
				Yes, it's in LA, CA with Latitude 34.070251464844 and Longitude -118.44759368896
			3.Enter your own IPv4 address in the website.  What did you learn? 
				My own IPv4 address is like my real address, which means it need to be hided, because I may not want to public my home address to everyone online. 

	2.SSH to RCS-Linux

		a.netstat -e
			1.What transport layer protocols do you see in use?
				TCP
			2.What application layer protocols do you see in use?
				SSH
		b.host www.rpi.edu
			1.What IPv4 addresses are used by www.rpi.edu?  
				rpi.edu has address 128.113.0.2
		c.traceroute www.google.com
			1.How many hops did it take to get to Google?   
				13
		d.In your Windows Command Prompt console use netstat (as in section 1.b) to find your current SSH connection.   Copy the netstat line showing the SSH connection to here. 
				Proto Recv-Q Send-Q Local Address               Foreign Address             State
				tcp        0      0 rmtacc26-la.rcs.rpi.edu:ssh swains-87.dynamic2.rp:49880 ESTABLISHED 
				tcp        0      0 rmtacc26-la.rcs.rpi.edu:ssh palmyra-atoll-71.dyna:56450 ESTABLISHED 
				tcp        0      0 rmtacc26-la.rcs.rpi.edu:ssh swains-23.dynamic2.rp:58356 ESTABLISHED 				      

	3.Overriding DNS	
		Use jEdit, notepad or some other text editor to edit your hosts file: C:\Windows\System32\drivers\etc\hosts (/etc/hosts on linux/unix).  Using the examples in the comments at the top of the hosts file as a guide, give www.rpi.edu a new host name – you can use any IP address of www.rpi.edu for this exercise (you need only one IP).
		Visit the new hostname in your browser and capture a screenshot of the browser window. (CTRL-SHIFT-ALT P4rntScrn)  
		Paste the screenshot here.(I’d encourage you to now return your hosts file to its original state. Then clear your Browser’s cache).) 


















