What leads to Chinese factory

Few days ago, my professor introduced an article about how bad Chinese factories conditions are and how terribly Chinese factories workers live in these factories. As a Chinese student who used to work with these factories for quite a few years, I would like to talk more about what lead to such situation, how it is now, and how will we deal with it in the future. I started working since middle school as a phone dealer, which is bascially sell phones to customers and provide them with customized suggestions. That 5-years working experience allowed me directly get in touch with the business model of this field, from the factory to the customer.

In 2008, iphone 4 was officially released by Apple Inc. The whole world was crazy about getting an Iphone 4. From Justin Biber to a middle school student, almost everyone want to have an Iphone to show their social position. Those celebrites use Iphones to show their fashion, and the studnets use Iphones to show the fact that they are cool kids in the school. Due to the expotential growth of requirement, Foxconn factories started to become one of the biggest labor oriented factories in China. 

However, the problem also comes with the growth of the world’s largest contract electronics manufacturer. Due to the extremely lagre amount of pressure of producing large amount of Iphones, more and more workers choose to suicide. In 2010, there were 15 workers chose to suicide to end their life, and 7 out of these 15 were happened in May. All of these workers are young people whose age range is from 19 to 25. The suicides drew media attention, and employment practices at Foxconn were investigated by several of its customers, including Apple and Hewlett-Packard (HP).

Why would these people suicide? Why don't these works just quit the job and go somewhere else? What is the main reason leading to the problem? As far as I am concerned, based on my working experience with people who used to work at foxconn, I would say there are two main reasons:

1. Tough located in Pepple Republic of China, the world's biggest communism country, Foxconn is mainly investigated by prople from People of China, which means foxconn is actually a factory based on the business model of capitalism. Accoridng to capitalism's business model, taking advantages from others in the main way of making benefits in a short period, which could be summarized with the world exploit. The more advantages we take from others, the more benefits we can make. If we regard working as a kind of trading, the more unbalanced exchangements we make to the people we hire, the more benefits we can make.
	
	The aim of foxconn is actually pretty easy to understand: making money, and make as much as possible. They make use of the reputation of Shenzhen, Shanghai, or some other internationally famous ciries to attract young workers from other provinces. It is pretty claer that this kind of firm is labor oriented, as I mentioned before. The labor oriented firms are usually running with the policy called 3H and 1L. 3H stands for high quality, high speed of producing, and hgih resistance of the products. No matter how hard it is to produce the products, they will finally find a way produce it easily. The one L stands for low cost. In other words, it is the low price of labor in China provides Foxconn with such a huge advantge. People work at foxconn 24 x 7 to get the order finished nice and neat.

	To manage such a huge firm, foxconn has its own management system, the militarization management. The strict hierachy in Foxconn has three special features: 

		Firstly, the strict hierachy puts obeying the rules at the first place all the time. Obying the rules and orders are the base of living as a foxcon worker.

		Secondly, individuals are always of less importance than the entity. If needed, individuals are supposed to sacrifise for the benifits of the unity.

		Thirdly, also known as the most Chinese one, the centerialized power. The structure of management is like a parymid, and the power is centerialized to one people finally. In such a Chinese management pattern, people are being charged do not need to figure what to do and why. All they need to focus on is how to finish the work nice and neat.

It is such non-democracy management pattern leads to the idea: individuals are not essential at all. It doen't matter if there is one more people or not.

2. The education level of the workers is also a main reason leads to the tragety. In foxconn, there are basically only two type of workers: young worker whoes age is about 20 and elder workers whose age range is about 40. Both of them do not have realtively high level of education. 

	The reason why people about 40 are still working there 24x7 is because they have children back home. They need to work unimageably hard to support their for further education and other living fees. They have very specific aim for their life, which explain why there is no one older than 30 among people who choose to suicide.

	However, when it comes to the 20-years people, it becomes really hard for them to afford the pressure. 

		They are still very yong, just finished the 9-years free education, and eager to explore the new world, like most international students do in US. However, ths reality is both cruel and bloddy. They think they can get rid of being managed by parents, have their own job, and chase their dreams. They think the world is like the book described, and they can achieve something special in the society. Their lack of living exprience and academic knowledge directly hit them in their faces. Barely can they find the meaning of their life. Only thing they are doing everyday is repating basic and mechnical operation. 

		Their daily life is quite boring: working, eating, and sleeping, which leads to their lack of social activities. I have a friend worked in Foxconn for quite a few weeks, and he told he still does not know the name of his roommates. Their friends are basicall their classmates, relatives, and people from the same province.

Cannot find the meaning of life, being lack of social activities, and cannot face the crucial world, workers about 20 can barely stand the pressure, which leads to suicides. 

These are the basically two main reasons lead to the problem in these Chinese factories such as foxconn. 

Clearly, it needs to be chagned. What can we do to change such a bad situation? According to what US factories did, it seems that providing workers with stable living conditions, health care insurance, and chance to make difference are very helpful, and that is also what these Chinese factories are doing now. In 2015, the standard amount of salary is raised a lot. These factories start to have psychological counseling in their working area to prevent people form choosing suicide anymore.

As long as we have enough time, the problem of Chineses factories will be solved anyway. However, what about people in other countries such as Vietnam? Will the problems in China also appear in Vietnam? Probably yes, or no. We do not know. It is still a huge problem need to be solved in the future.


