Vandana Shiva

Food and Agriculture Organization(FAO)

genetically modified organism (GMO)

pa`tri`ar`chy 
	-a family, group, or government controlled by a man or a group of men

re·gime 
	-a form of government : a particular government
	: a system of management

Q1: Why does Vandana Shiva oppose globalization? It obviously decrease the asymmetry of information to decrease the cost of living, and decreasing asymmetry is also what internet is trying to do. There are some disadvantages of globalization, however, compared to the advantages we get from globalization, these disadvantages are nothing.

Q2: Why should woman be the special pepple to handle the argilculture? They could totally archive something more just like what our president Shirely Ann Jackson did at AT&T's Bell Laboratory. I don't think we are supposed to divide tasks according to the gender.



DISCUSSION QUESTIONS:
---

1. According to the type of tasks assigned to women in the early years, the achievement made by women may not be exposed to the public. 
It could be avoid by commercialize the work to visualize how much work is done by each one.
I would say it is a problem because sexism are more likely to happen in Asia rather than America nor Europe because the feminism started during the 19th century and early twentieth century.

2. Women get the charge of food.(pg 498 got more info) The bio-diversity will be contained and all the resources are renewable.

3. Capatalists prefer the more sufficient way of solving problem rather than enviromentally-friendly, which leads to the dominant position of hybrid plants. Just as Matthew effect pointed out in the Bible, the number of these hybrid plants will increasingly enlarge, which can leads to the vanish from bio-diversity.

4. Genetically modified organism (GMO) and Hybrid technologies. GMO could be managed by the means Shiva suggested.

5. Political Factors and fincial factors. As for the second question, I would say both because both globalization and industrailization of food are extending the period of food is comsumed form producing.

6. It could.As long as the organization of checking the status of food is still on duty such as FDA(Food and Drug Administration), there is a strong reason for us to make sure the food is secure.

7. Under the category of genter. In terms of security and amount of food is produced by women. I don't really think her statements are pretty stong for several reasons.

- There is no reason to state the problem genderly.

- There are some very helpful agencys like FDA to make sure the security of food.

- She doesn't compare the advantages of globallization.

