Aug, 29, 2016
---

# Agenda
	- Intro to Prof, TA, Students
	- Review syllabus
	- Review Learning Management System web
	- Technology Survy

---
# Intro to Prof, TA, Students
	
	Richard M Plotka
	Lally 304
	516-527-9860
	Thursday 12:30 - 1:30 PM
	shen.lung or rplotka@tsi400.com
	FB: rplotka@tsi400.com //push him!

	Melissa
	Lally 315
	518-428-6147
	Tue and Fri 2:00 - 3:00
	haym2@rpi.edu

	Jeremy Falk
	TA LAB : Lally 205
	715-697-6180
	Wed 5:00 PM - 7:00 PM

# Intro to ITWS: RPI LMS site
	
	http;//lms9.rpi.edu/

	What is IT:
	The application of CS adn WEB sicence to the common purposes of life.

	- Technology
		Protocols
		Programming
		Web Design
		Database

	- Application
		Communication and Networking
		SOcial Networks
		Enterprise Apps(ERP, SCM, CRM)
			automated billing systems
			payment processing
			email marketing systems
			content management
			call center and customer support
			Customer Relationship Management (CRM)
			Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP)
			Business Intelligence
			Business Continuity Planning (BCP)
			HR Management
			Enterprise Application Integration (EAI)
			enterprise search
			messaging and collaboration systems.	
			

		...


# Case Reading

	http;//cb.hbsp.harvard.edu/cbmp/access/50889091  //make takes $30

# Assigments
	- Weekly posted on LMS, due prior to the next class

# Grading Crateria

	HW and Business Case 15
	Lab 				 15
	Quiz 				 20
	Term Proj 			 20
	Final 				 20
	Participation 		 10

	Participation!!!



Sept, 1st, 2016
---

#Bits and Bytes

	Bits

		Digital

			Byte: a bounch of bits

			8 bits = 1 byte //for convenience
				
			Why?	
				-Powers of 2 are convenient for binary
				-It is large enough
					2^4 = 16 too small
					2^8 = 256 big enough for Eng lang
				-0/1 or On/Off or yes/no is helpful

	64 bit machine

		A machine that process info in 64 bit chunks

		Processor simply transports the info 64 bits a time

		the data path is large

		64 bit = 8 bytes

	Binary convert

	Hexadecimal

		-Sign color in CSS file, represents by 3 bytes, such as 000000(black) to FFFFFF(white)





# Network Protocal

	Connecting devices together to share data

		Switch:  links devices  together to form  a network  
		Router:   connects networks  together and acts as  a dispatcher
	
		Some devices act as both switch and router 

	
	TCP/IP stands for Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol

	3 ways handshake
		A:I'am here, R U there?
		B:Yeah, R U still there?
		A:Sure I am, let's talk!

	UDP: Legal of Legend, real-time such as Skype

	UDP vs TCP


# Protocal

	What is a protocal:
		A protocal is a set of rules to communicate.

































