Minds and machines

A few days ago, my professor of a philosophy provided us with an episode of Star Track. That is an episode about making a decision which is related to personal identity, mind-body problem and moral issues regarding taking someone's life. However, before talking about the philosophy problem, let's briefly review what happened in this episode.

1. 
There are two characters called Neelix and Tuvok. Initially, both of them have their own personal identities. They are two separated individuals. Neelix is the chief of the ship while Tuvok serves as the ship's Chief of Security and Chief Tactical Officer. 

One day, both of them were sent to execute a mission about collecting samples from another planet. However, when they were beamed back, something unexpected happened. Neelix and Tuvok were merged together at the molecular level to form a single one. According to the  machine, that guy fits the characteristics of both Neelix and Tuvok. What's more, he had the memory and skills of both Neelix and Tuvok. Later on, this guy decided to name himself Tuvix.

Unfortunately, Tuvix was not accepted by the staff on the ship initially, especially Kes. Kes is the girlfriend of Neelix and mentee of Tuvok. Barely did she take to Tuvix, and she was trying to avoid him as possible as she could. However, others accepted the existence of Tuvix quickly by his humor and his cooking skills due to the truth that Tuvix has the personalities of both Neelix and Tuvok.

However, when everyone was starting to accept the existence of Tuvix, it became possible to divide him into Neelix and Tuvok. In other words, Neelix and Tuvok could get back by separating Tuvix. When Captain Janeway told Tuvix so, however, Tuvix refused to be divided. He claimed that he has the rights to survive, and he did not deserve to die. When he was asking support from the crew, no one would like to help him out. 

Finally, Tuvix was separated into Neelix and Tuvok, and Tuvix was eliminated because of that.

2. 
Now let's talk about the philosophical view about what happened in this episode. Let's start with the definition of dualism and materialism, the most essential two views about this world. In dualism, it is believed that mind and body are not referring to the same object. They are not identical. The mind is non-physical and body is physical. In materialism, it is the matter that the fundamental of everything. All phenomena even the thinking process in our minds are results of the material interaction. In other words, minds are the result of body. 

After giving the definition of these two theories, let’s see how they will explain the case of Tuvix differently.

In dualism, the minds were not merged as the bodies did, because the transition machine directly merges their bodies together. According to the mind-body problem defined in dualism, this process had nothing to do with their minds. Their minds still exist, because in the episode, Tuvix had the memory of Neelix and Tuvok. However, Tuvix has his own mind at the same time.

In materialism, the minds were merged together because their bodies were merged together. According to the definition of the mind-body problem in materialism, minds are the results of the body.  When the bodies were gone, the original minds were also gone. As for Tuvix, he does have his own mind because he has a non-identical body to both Neelix and Tuvok.

Compared with dualism, materialism makes more sense to me in the case of Tuvix.

3. 
Now, before moving to next philosophy topic: personal identity, let’s have some basic ideas about identity.

Identity could be divided into two ways: qualitative identity and numerical identity. 

Qualitative identity means two things have same properties, so they can be less or more qualitatively identical. A pair of twins is qualitatively identical because they are very similar to each other biologically.

Numerical identity, also known as true identity, requires absolute, or total, qualitative identity, and can only hold between a thing and itself. For example, Barack Obama and the 44th president of United States are numerically identical.

4. 
After that, let’s think about this question: Is our notion of personal identity a form of qualitative identity or one of true identity? I would consider it as the qualitative identity because I am not the person ten years ago. Tough me and myself ten years ago may not be the same one biologically, we are still the same person in others’ view because I change so slow that most of the others can’t even tell. However, when the personal identity encounters these two views mentioned above, the answer becomes way more complicated.

In the view of materialism, which is known as body defines personal identity， personal identity refers to the qualitative identity. According to the definition of materialism, it is the body that the biological base of the soul. It is the body to make me  myself rather than others.

In the view of dualism, which is known as minds define personal identity, personal identity refers to the numerical identity rather than qualitative identity. 

Intuitively speaking, I would prefer the definition from materialism because sometimes the difference between me and myself few seconds ago could be too small to tell.

As for the personal identity through time, in the view of dualism, people are the same person because the souls are not changing. As for materialism, people are recognized as the same one is due the change of them are too small to tell. I may cut a piece of my hair and other still consider me as Yuze because I change so slightly. If I go to get my hair dyed, get a plastic surgery, and change the way how I talk, others may not recognize me as Yuze again.

5. 
Now let’s move to Tuvix case about mind-body problem and personal identity. Personally speaking, I would say body defines mind, and personal identity refers to qualitative identity. In the case of Tuvix, I would consider has his own personal identity because his body differs from both Neelix’s and Tuvok’s. As for the question do Neelix and Tuvok still exist during the time Tuvix exist, I would say no, because both of their bodies are gone. However, they come back as not exactly same Neelix and Tuvok when Tuvix is split because their biological structures are constructed, but there is something new in their bodies this time. Both of them store the memory of Tuvix, which is not in their memory before.

6. 
After all these philosophy statements, let’s take a look at Captain Janeway’s decision. What kind of decision did she make? I would say she made an immoral but good decision. It is immoral because Captain Janeway killed Tuvix to save her Neelix and Tuvok. Tuvix has his own rights of choosing death or not. He doesn’t deserve to die. As for Neelix and Tuvok, according to materialism, they were gone already, so they do not have rights to do anything. However, it is a good decision is because  she got Neelix and Tuvok back. Both Neelix and Tuvok are not gone yet in the staff’s mind and people are still expecting to get them back.