Aug, 30th, 2016
---

GINI Index: Disturbution of wealth

Dr. Eglash

# Linear Approach

# Tuning Approach

What am I expected to do with the materials?

What they gonna do with the extra food?


Reading Notes

	African vibrations:
		percussive : hitting music

		As a huge fan of hip-hop music, I have to say I am glad the society finally start to analyse this amazing type of music. Just like Max Roach, the American jazz percussionist, drummer, and composer, said, hip-hop lives in the world-not the world of music-that's why it is so revolutionary. In other words, hip-hop is an essential sign of human civilization. Based of percussiveness of other instruments, it seems to have the ability of moving the bodies of aduience. As for the three main parts of hip-hop, I don't really agree we should divide it into 3 parts. The musicological part, the sociological part, and the psychoanalytical part are strongly combined together to have the magic of motivating its audiences. Even in modern society, there are still few tribes' shaman dancing with rhythmized lyrics and percussive music to finish their own rituals. 

	The Neuroscience Of Trance
		
		MGH = Massachusetts General Hospital

		To be honest, I really can't agree more about the result they got about the realtionship between percussive music and shamanic rituals. Even in China, we still keep some percussive music in traditional rituals. Even in the opening ceremoney of Olympic in Beijing, 2008, drumming was a main part of the ritual to inspire the sportsmen. It feels like tuning of body to lead to a perfect state as the shaman wished.

	The Race for Cyberspace: Information Technology in the Black Diaspora

		Doubtlessly, the appearance of information techonology amazingly changed human civilizaion via changing the way how ideas are spread. Even in Dr. Eglash's article pointed out: "invention of technology and cultural identity are deeply intertwined", it is quite obvious that the existence of technology lead black community to an another way. 























